>> NARRATOR: The contemporary
art world is vibrant and
booming as never before.
It's a 21st century phenomenon,
a global industry in its own
right.
Brilliant Ideas looks at the
artists at the heart of this.
Artists with a unique power
to astonish, challenge and
shock.
Push boundaries, ask new
questions, and see the world
afresh.
In this program, Luke Jerram.
♪
♪ I-D-E-A-S ♪
♪ Ideas ♪
Luke Jerram is probably the
most famous artist you've never
heard of.
Working mainly in sculpture and
large-scale installation, his
work has been seen by millions
of people across the globe.
You may not know his name, but
chances are you've come across
his artwork, and may even have
played it.
♪ I'll move ahead ♪
♪ Forget about the images
inside our heads ♪
♪ Can we wake someday... ♪
(Scatting)
>> LUKE: Some of the art
projects I make are quite fun,
they have a sort of playful
element to them.
Um, but actually that, you know,
within my practice as an artist,
there's-- there's multiple
narratives, and different
strands that have been
developing over a number of
years, so some of my art
projects involve science and
engineering, um, and perception.
And others involve sort of music
and, an interest in sound, and a
sort of playful public
engagement aspect to them as
well.
(Cheering)
>> I think he's a unique
visionary.
I think he, um, he always comes
up with new ideas.
>> Luke's practice is about
perception and human perception.
He creates really interesting
and engaging art works that,
kind of, communicate with
audiences on many different
levels.
>> He is able to take, if you
like, sometimes obvious things,
but use them in very new and
very effective ways.
>> As an artist I'm quite happy
to apply my creativity to
anything, really-- and by
working with a specialist,
whether it's an engineer or a
composer or a glassblower, it
means that anything's possible.
♪
>> NARRATOR: UK-based artist
Luke Jerram is preparing to
install Withdrawn, a new work
which opens to the public in
just a few weeks.
>> Are you coming on?
>> NARRATOR: He's collected old
fishing boats from around the
country, and plans to place
them deep in the woods outside
Bristol, where he lives and
works.
>> LUKE: Withdrawn came as an
idea by all the flooding that we
had last winter in-- in the
south west of England, where
you'd see houses underwater and
cars floating down, um, roads.
And I think with those sort of
extreme weather events, you end
up with this very sublime,
almost poetic imagery, and it is
awful, but at the same time,
they're very strong, powerful
images that come out of tsunamis
or-- or tidal surge.
The imagery for a set of fishing
boats abandoned, or that would
have been dumped, perhaps, in
the middle of the woodland, came
from that kind of experience.
The boats will act as a--
a venue for all sorts of-- um,
lectures and performances.
One of my slight concerns is
that people have heard about the
project and they go to see the
boats in the woods, there may be
a percentage of the population
who will go, "But that's--
that's just some boats in the
wood."
You know, so there's that sort
of sense of self doubt about it.
I mean, we've got all these
series of events on anyway, but
it's at what point do you start
making artwork for other people?
You know.
What I try and do with all my
art works is try and have, sort
of, different points of entry.
So that, you know, a four-year-
old child would be able to
appreciate and explore this
installation in one way, but
a marine biologist will think
about it in another, and an art
curator will think about it in
another.
So that there's enough there
for everybody, really.
I suppose that all the art
projects I create are--
are ideas-driven.
So they're-- they stem from a
particular concept, or a brief
that I'm given.
Ideas can come from anywhere,
I think.
You know, I'd be quite happy to,
to create an artwork out of a
set of ladders, you know.
I think we can-- I think we're
also, we're all innovative.
We can all come up with ideas in
the pub on a Friday night.
The trick is being able to take
those ideas and actually make
them happen.
The idea for Sky Orchestra came
from visiting Tunisia, and I was
staying in a small town on the
edge of the desert, um, called
Douz, right in the south of
Tunisia.
And in the middle of the night,
um, as I was laying in this sort
of dark hotel room, a minaret
started calling right on the
edge of town.
And a few minutes later, another
minaret started calling,
slightly closer.
And after a while there were,
like, ten minarets calling
from all different parts of the
town, right across the city, it
was a very beautiful experience.
And it just sort of lifted me
into this space on the edge of
sleep.
And I came back to Bristol,
and I bumped into a hot air
balloonist, and it sort of came
to me, this idea that, actually,
I could recreate that edge of
sleep... musical, sculptural
experience, for the public, by
strapping speakers on to hot air
balloons, and playing music to
affect people's sleep.
And we would fly over cities,
um, to sort of inspire people's
imaginations.
♪
>> MAN: This is ridiculous.
>> MAN #2: I think it's really
cool.
>> MAN #3: This is fantastic.
(Distant soft music)
>> That was probably the first
artwork that I made, where I
realised that, actually, instead
of inviting the public to come
into a museum or a-- an opera
house or a theatre, that
actually we can deliver an
artistic experience to people's
own homes, and their own
communities.
>> NARRATOR: But Luke didn't
stop at the artistic
experience.
He wanted to go deeper.
So he contacted an expert on
the science of sleep.
>> Luke has an interest in
consciousness, to go with my,
sort of, psychology background,
that feeds in.
So we were trying to look at
what would be the impact of
these sounds, and how could we
maximize, if you like, the
pleasant effect of the sounds in
terms of people's dream and
waking experience.
I think our lives are often very
regulated now.
We live in a, you know, a high
tech society, and we have all
these gizmos, but somehow I
think Luke often taps into a
very fresh new aspect.
And you have to sort of stand
back and say, "Well, I kind of
know the components, but he's
put them together and created
something that's really
different and new."
And I think that's one of the
best things about what he does.
♪
>> NARRATOR: Artist Luke Jerram
grew up in a small village in
the west of England.
As a young boy, he was
fascinated by how things
worked.
>> I was interested in and quite
curious in the world around me.
I suppose I was one of those
kids to take apart the radio,
you know, and just try and work
out how it was working.
I've always had a fascination
for perception and how we see
the world, because I'm colour
blind, which actually means
that, um, yeah, my paintings are
really awful, to begin with.
But I suppose that-- that
colour-blindness has given me
a natural interest in visual
perception.
♪
Coming from a small village,
there wasn't really much going
on, really.
Uh, and I remember going,
probably during A Levels, when
I was about eighteen, going to
the Tate in Liverpool and seeing
a Giacometti exhibition.
And there was a little moment
of, uh, of sort of a spark that
occurred, that--- that I was
somehow fascinated.
The sculptures that looked
ordinary, sort of figurative
sculptures from one angle, and
then when you-- when you look at
the artwork from the-- from the
front, you realise that the
sculpture's incredibly thin.
You know, these minute, sort of
thin figures.
Um, so they were sort of, they
were playing with perception, I
suppose.
Um... but there was something
there that sort of caught my
imagination.
>> NARRATOR: Years later, Luke
would apply that same
fascination to a sculpture of
his own.
>> LUKE: I made, uh, Maya,
through my concern for my
daughter's upbringing, perhaps,
in this digital age that we're
in.
Um, we all seem to be fused to
our little gadgets, our mobile
phones, that we hold in front
of us.
So she's there, holding and
engrossed in her mobile phone,
standing on the train station.
And the interesting thing is
that from a distance, it looks
like a-- it does look like a--
a little girl standing alone at
the-- at the station.
But as you get closer, the image
fragments into all these little
cubes.
So I was interested in the
perceptual, sort of, phenomena
of that.
We actually scanned my daughter
with an Xbox, and took that 3D
model and pixelated it.
And then the entire artwork was
made by water-jet cutting layers
and layers of aluminium, and
sticking all those together.
We then spent a month putting on
little stickers, all the
different squares.
Um, my wife came over and saw
the artwork, and said, "Well,
you can't use that."
And I, because I'm colour blind,
I'd been putting on the odd
green sticker.
So I had to take off all the
green stickers, and I got
technicians to do the job
properly.
Um, but the artwork is now in
Bristol Temple Meads station.
♪
At art college, I studied
sculpture, but also performance
art.
So, what I find now is that a
lot of my art projects have a
sort of "live art" element to
them, so they're sculptural, but
there's-- they're sort of live
in some way, as well.
And also, when I studied
performance, we were-- you'd
often find yourself in an
audience, looking at a performer
on stage.
And I realised then that
actually the performer was often
having the most amount of fun.
So there's a number of my art
projects now that are actually--
it turns the general public into
the performer.
So with Play Me, I'm Yours, the
pianos act as a big blank canvas
for the public to be creative.
And it places the audience at
the centre of things, to make
sure that they have the most
amount of fun.
♪
Play Me, I'm Yours came from
visiting a laundrette where I'd
see the same people there every
weekend, sort of, washing their
clothes, but no one was talking
to one another.
So I realised then, in a city,
there must be all these
invisible communities right
across a city.
People perhaps waiting for a bus
together every day, or waiting
for a train.
And they'd recognise each other,
but they wouldn't talk.
So I thought by putting a piano
into that location, it would act
as a catalyst for conversation,
to get people talking to one
another.
And, um, in 2007 I installed 15
pianos across Birmingham as part
of an art project.
Um, and the idea seemed to sort
of capture people's imaginations
somehow.
So the pianos were left on the
street, uh, for-- for the public
to play, for two or three weeks.
Um, each piano's got the words
"Play Me, I'm Yours" on it, so
that's an invitation for the
public to sit down and engage
with it.
To say, "Look, these pianos are
here for you to sit down and
engage with."
>> NARRATOR: After the success
of his first pianos in
Birmingham, Luke took his idea
to the world, and it soon
became a global phenomenon.
♪
>> LUKE: We've installed Play
Me, I'm Yours in London, in Los
Angeles, New York, Toronto,
Sydney, and Paris and Geneva.
Um, and what's interesting is
that the-- the experience and
the interaction changes from one
city to another.
So in London, people will sit
down and play a piano, quite
shyly.
They might film themselves a
little bit.
Whereas in New York, when we
installed 60 pianos across the
city, the public would turn up
dressed like pop stars, and
they would be introducing
themselves into the camera.
Sort of, pouting, you know,
as though it was like a giant X
Factor television competition.
They wanted to be discovered.
♪ As they gather around ♪
♪ The fire that burns
near ground ♪
♪ Now we are one, two, three,
for you can't stop us now ♪
>> He really genuinely wants
to engage people, through art,
with, um, new experiences and
questions about the world that
we live in.
>> I think often art is, kind
of, seen as a bit sort of
distant, and a bit aloof, and a
bit separate from ordinary
people, but something which
actually engages and creates
a conversation, and makes you
think again about the urban
space you live in... I mean,
for me, that's something to be
applauded.
>> By the end of this year I
will have installed more than
1,500 pianos in about 50 cities
right across the globe.
More than 10 million people will
have played the pianos over the
time.
Um, and they've really, kind of,
connected people.
In Sao Paolo we put a piano in
a train station, and I came
across a mother and a daughter,
and it turns out the mother had
worked as a cleaner for four
years to be able to send her
daughter to piano lessons on the
other side of the city.
But a piano in Sao Paolo costs
about a year's wage, so after
working as a cleaner for four
years, she'd never actually, uh,
heard or saw her daughter play
the piano.
And they came across this piano
and the daughter sat down and
played beautiful music for her
mother, who burst out into
tears.
You know, it was a really
wonderful thing to witness.
And with that art project, you
know, you've reached so many
thousands of people round the
world, and it's really, kind of,
connected and changed a lot of
people's lives.
Um, so I'm quite-- yeah, I'm
quite proud of that.
♪
(Saw whirring)
>> NARRATOR: After finding
success with large scale public
engagement artworks, Luke
Jerram knows it's not just the
art that's important, but the
audience too.
>> It's part of the job for me
to-- as well as making artwork,
I also-- my job is also to have
it communicated, and get it
commissioned, and get it out
there, and so a lot of people
know about it.
So a lot of the artwork I make
generates a huge amount of both
national and international
publicity.
>> After the extraordinary
public response to his piano
installation Play Me, I'm
Yours, Luke decided to embark
on his most ambitious artwork
yet.
>> Park and Slide came about,
um, it was just a small, fun
idea, really.
Uh, that I had, because I-- my
office was based on the street
where Park and Slide took place.
And I thought in the summertime,
wouldn't it be nice during the
heatwave to be able to commute
home on a giant waterslide?
>> In 2014, Luke's vision became
a reality.
But not even he could have
predicted just how big it would
become.
>> On the day we ended up with
60,000 people turning up to--
to watch the slide.
But also, hundreds of
journalists, and it led to about
500 news articles that reached
more than a billion people
around the world.
♪
I tried to make the whole event
as cheap as possible, so that
the slide could actually be
repeated by other cities around
the world.
So instead of, you know, taking
money from advertisers, we
decided to raise the money
through crowdfunding instead.
And actually it worked really
well, as a way of kind of
creating a sense of ownership.
People felt like the slide
belonged to them.
So... yeah, it's made people
think about their city in a
different way, and I think that
is quite important.
I think each artwork that I make
sort of expresses a different
side of my personality, I
suppose.
So, um, some of the artworks I
make are quite generous.
It's a gift, you know, to a
community.
Whereas others are perhaps an
expression of my interest in
science, or visual perception.
♪
The idea for these sculptures
came from looking in a newspaper
and seeing images of viruses
used to illustrate stories of
the latest pandemic.
So at the moment obviously we've
got Ebola that the world is
dealing with.
Um, and you'd often see a
brightly-coloured image of Ebola
used to illustrate a story.
But I realised quite quickly
through doing a little bit of
research that actually viruses
don't have any colour.
That they're actually smaller
than the wavelength of light.
So about ten years ago I made a
small glass sculpture of HIV,
as something to contemplate and
think about.
Um, and people seemed to like
it, it was bought by a museum.
And now it's led to this massive
body of glass microbiology
artwork, uh, that is presented
in museums all round the world.
What I'm doing is I'm just
making accurate renditions of
the virus.
They're about a million times
larger than the real thing, but
it-- it makes them incredibly
beautiful.
So you're attracted to them, but
then when you realise that this,
um, sculpture is actually
representing HIV, for instance,
you're kind of repelled by it.
So that creates a tension, and
I suppose I'm interested in that
tension.
The photographs of these glass
sculptures actually have now
become part of the vocabulary of
virology.
So they get used by scientists
all the time.
Go on book covers, go into
medical journals.
So it's a sort of-- there's an
unexpected outcome, I think,
to lots of my art projects.
Um, and I think a good artwork
will do that.
As an artist, at the moment,
I'm managing about 16 different
art projects with-- um, that I'm
developing concurrently.
Um... and they all have their
own time scale.
It's a bit stressful at times,
um, but generally I have a--
a lot of fun.
♪
A lot of my art projects, they
seem sort of disconnected,
but there are sort of narratives
that connect them.
>> Today, Luke is installing his
latest artwork, Withdrawn.
He's gone back to his roots,
and created a large-scale
installation that he hopes will
spark the public's imagination.
>> I'm interested in the-- the
whole experience of an artwork.
So for some people, the journey
towards this artwork will start
when they hear about it in the
newspaper and they decide to go
with their kids.
And now, they might drive up or
they'll cycle to the car park,
and then there'll be a walk
into the woods to get here, to
discover it with their kids.
And that journey is all part of
the artistic experience, really,
from my perspective.
And what you'll end up with at
the end of it is a set of
memories.
And it'll be the memories,
fundamentally, that is the--
the legacy for this project.
>> And just like Luke's other
artworks, today he's attracted
a lot of press.
Much to the delight of those
who commissioned the piece.
>> Personally I think it's
absolutely exceptional.
We're just, uh, we're trying to
recall if we've ever seen
anything quite like this before.
>> Absolutely.
>> Bringing real world objects
into a woodland, it's a very
particular kind of magical
experience.
>> And we've had the privilege
of coming first thing this
morning, haven't we, and seeing
it as the sun rose.
It's been wonderful.
>> The way Luke works is that
he's always got, like, a long
list of fabulous ideas, and, you
know, things that he'd just love
to achieve.
He thinks it's about finding the
right person at the right time,
in the right place, who will
just grab it, and work with him
collaboratively to deliver it.
And that's exactly what happened
with Withdrawn.
♪
>> LUKE: I feel like I've just
learned how to be an artist, I
suppose, and I'm sort of,
beginning to, sort of open my
wings, spread my wings and get a
sense of what I'm capable of
doing.
To create artwork, it doesn't
have to be huge and large-scale.
It can-- you can do, sort of,
outrageous, innovative,
ground-breaking artwork, on an
artwork that's as big as your
hand.
So it's not always about scale,
or complexity.
It can just be about simple
ideas, um, that can change the
world.
♪